color laser printers and photocopiers
getting cheaper and cheaper every day
allowing millions access to their own
high-quality printing presses now that's
great for free speech it means that
people across the world can print and
distribute their own political pamphlets
leaflets books or in my particular case
dozens of pictures of funny cats that
I've downloaded off of the internet who
Danny we need to use the printer okay or
just another one but what if I was to
tell you that there's a secret code on
all of these documents a code that
allows governments and other people in
the know to trace any page back to its
original printer and Danny O'Brien from
the Electronic Frontier Foundation and
this is Seth Sean
aff staff technologist hello we research
new technology and find out how it
affects a free speech privacy or other
civil liberties and in this instructable
will teach you how to see in decode the
printer dots
yeah
success you were the leader of the group
that researched and decoded the printed
notes but I do have to say that I can't
see anything in this page apart from the
Kin Kin well then in the code isn't in
what you sent from your computer to the
printer the codes been added by the
printer the printer itself has sprayed
occurred all across the entire page and
that cuts invisible well it's difficult
to see under ordinary conditions it's
printed in yellow and very very small
right side and yellow because because
yellow doesn't show up against the light
background that's right
under ordinary lighting conditions at
this size it's almost impossible to see
but we can actually make it visible by
magnification or by changing the light
so this is a sheet of paper from a
printer taken with a microscope that's
right this part of the paper here is
blank
we use the dynolite Pro computer
microscope here but you can use any of
these USB microscopes that magnify a 200
times yellow dots here and here and here
what if I don't have a microscope well
in that case you could use a blue light
for example that would increase the
contrast because if you look at the
yellow dots under blue light then the
yellow dots appear black it's great and
I actually actually have a blue light
here it's the Electronic Frontier
Foundation's very own blue LED
flashlight available free yes free for
only a donation of $5 anyway it's easier
if you turn off the lights and shine the
blue light on a blank part of the piece
of paper
is what a printed document looks like
under a blue light you can see that here
the yellow dots appear dark so once you
found out about this set what actually
did you guys do well we took a look at
the sample pages that we printed and we
invited the public to send their samples
as well which they continue to do and
they're still welcome to do so we've
built up a collection of sample printer
pages and we've taken a look at them
under blue lights and under microscopes
and tried to characterize the patterns
and try to figure out what information
is stored there and how its represented
and have you live anything from this
who's learnt quite a bit with the help
of a couple of volunteers we've managed
to break some of the codes but not all
that are used to represent this
information and what's actually encoded
on the dots so the most typical
information that you get in the dot
patterns is the serial number of the
printer that made the print and the date
and time that the document was printed
if the printer knows it and have you
found out this kind of information for
all this these yellow dots have you
cracked them all no so we only know for
a few kinds of printers how to read the
information we're confident that all the
printers that do this convey the same
kind of information but the way that
they convey the information is different
it depends on the particular model of
the printer a lot of manufacturers have
different codes from other manufacturers
in fact we can often tell just by
looking at a dot pattern what kind of
printer made that print even if we don't
know how to read the code so I can look
at a page like this one and tell you
that it was made on a Hewlett Packard
color laserjet so if somebody has done
this they found the printed notes the
first time and they want to help out
with the ef-s print adult project what
would you recommend they did well we're
still collecting samples so we'd
encourage people to send in their
printouts in the mail we have an address
on our website you can send us printouts
in the mail and help add to our
collection hopefully help us or other
researchers by giving us more sample
data to work with another really
important thing that you can do is let
printer companies
know that someone actually cares about
this this is something that the printer
companies have done on their own
initiative at the request apparently of
the government but not in compliance
with the law they didn't have a legal
obligation to do this
they were just asked to and went too
long so you can let your printer company
know if you object to this well thanks
very much that thank you again what if I
don't have a microscope